Hello there.
This is day.
And welcome back.
So we have seen that one of the unique selling points of Java is its platform independence capability
without compromising on execution speed.
And we know that it is because of Java.
Platform independence was possible as JVM installed on a particular platform can interpret Java bytecode
without any issues.
And since Java Bytecode is designed specifically to be interpreted by JVM, we also get very fast execution
speed.
And we also said that GM can additionally perform something called GI compensation, which makes executing
Java programs even more faster so they can execute super fast.
So GM is the cornerstone of Java and it has other important benefits to and it's a very sophisticated
software and it is so good that even programs written in other popular languages like Scala and Groovy
can be compiled into Java bytecode, which can then be run on any given.
That way they also get the benefits of Java, such as platform independence and fast execution speed.
So to run on JVM, all you need to do is produce Java bytecode.
So you need compilers which can produce Java bytecode.
Since Jevon plays such a vital role in making Georgia really attractive and making it one of the most
popular languages out there, it is important to have a good understanding of Graham.
We have a separate chapter dedicated to JVM, but at this point, let's at least get a good high level
understanding of GM and also its architecture.
And we will also see why Java programs run as fast as C or C++ programs.
So it is very important to understand this instead of just diving into the code.
So we need to know why Java programs run very fast.
Java virtual machine is called virtual, and that's because it is an abstract computing machine that
is like a real computing machine.
It has an instruction set which it executes, and its instruction set is the Java bytecode.
So for a CPU machine code serves as the instruction set, while for a JVM Java bytecode serves as the
instruction set.
Unlike a real computing machine, GM also manipulates memory at runtime.
That is, it uses memory to run its programs and to manipulate their data.
Not that the term run time here refers to the time when the program is actually executed.
Unlike I said earlier, GM is the cornerstone of Java platform and it has few core responsibilities
and one is loading and interpreting Java bytecode.
We know that interpreting Java Bytecode helps achieve platform independence along with fast execution
speed.
So it's a very fundamental responsibility of Java.
And next is security.
Security is critical as Java was developed for a networked environment where programs can be downloaded
from across the network.
And you don't want those programs to perform any harmful activities on the user's machine.
And third is automatic memory management.
Unlike C or C++, Java relieves its programmers from directly manipulating memory.
And it does that through its automatic memory management process.
And this makes programming in Java easier and also makes Java programs a lot safer.
That is, it will greatly minimize some really nasty memory related errors that one might make if they
are manipulating the memory directly.
And as we will soon see, JVM has separate components to manage these responsibilities.
And before we look at what constitutes a JVM, let's first look at what happens when a Java program
is run.
Let's say we have a Java program called Helo and now when we execute this program using the command
java space.
Hello.
An instance of JVM is created and is loaded into memory.
GBM then in turn loads the hallow program into memory and executes it.
As you can see here, both Gvm and the Hello program are now in memory.
So each Java application, like the HALO program here, runs inside a GM instance so we can see the
GM instance here.
Not that a GM instance runs only one Java application.
Now, if you want to run another program at the same time, then you can execute it separately.
So, for instance, while the program is running, if you want to run another program, let's call it
as goodbye.
Then you would say Java Space goodbye.
And that would create yet another instance of JVM, which will then execute the goodbye class.
So two JVM instances are being run at the same time, just like the way you can have two instances of
your browser running at the same time.
And now let's look at a typical architecture of avian.
Let's assume we have a Java program called Hello or Java which is compiled.
Next, we need to run it.
And so we would say Java Space.
Hello.
And we know with that JVM will be launched.
That is it will be loaded into memory, as we just saw in the previous slide.
And at the same time, Java will also get a chunk of memory from the underlying operating system, and
we are referring it as the runtime data areas.
So it's just the Java memory.
JVM now has to load load class, which includes the Java bytecode.
For this, JVM invokes a component called class loader, which as the name implies, locates hello class
and loads the corresponding byte code into memory.
So as the name class suggests, it loads the class.
And when we say memory.
It would be these two areas called heap and method area.
Next, the byte codes are verified by a component called byte code verifier, and this is to ensure
that the loaded class file is not corrupted.
And this is very critical because in certain Java applications, we know that classes can be downloaded
from across the Internet, like in the case of applets, and those classes could have been created by
some hackers.
So bytecode verification is critical to ensure the integrity of Java.
Once the bytecode has been verified and if there are no issues, then it can be safely executed by the
execution engine, which includes the Java interpreter along with a JIT compiler.
So the interpreter here interprets the Java bytecode.
So this execution engine, which includes the interpreter and compiler, gives us the benefit of platform
independence and very fast execution speed.
So it handles one of the core responsibilities of JVM, which we discussed earlier.
Garbage collector is the component that is responsible for automatic memory management, which, as
we mentioned earlier, is another core responsibility of JVM.
And as the name implies, garbage collector collects the garbage in our program, which would be things
that are no longer useful.
And it means it would reclaim the memory access by those things.
Next security manager is responsible for ensuring security, which is another core responsibility of.
For example, if you want to restrict any bytecode from accessing your file system, the security manager
can ensure this by running the byte code in a more restricted environment called the sandbox environment.
Finally, there are also a few other components that constitute a GBM.
But let's not worry about them.
I think we discuss some of the main ones here and it should have given you a fair idea about what constitutes
a GBM.
In GBM Internals chapter, we will discuss many of these components in detail.
Now let's spend a little bit of time discussing the JIT compiler as it plays a critical role in making
Java programs run very fast.
Just like in the case of C, r C++.
We already discussed this.
Interpreting Java bytecode is much faster than interpreting source code.
This is because byte code is designed specifically for Java and is already compiled and also sometimes
optimized.
So let's see how JIT or Just in time compilation helps in further speeding up the execution.
So as the program is executing and bytecode is being interpreted, JVM monitors frequency of execution
of each piece of executed bytecode.
Some of the code is more frequently executed than others, and the frequently executed code is referred
to as hotspots.
Hotspots are then given to G80 compiler, which is a component of JVM, as we just saw.
And JIT compiler converts these hotspots to machine code, and this machine code is then cached, which
means that it is saved in memory for future use.
And in future, whenever there is a need to execute this hot spots, the corresponding caste machine
code is what gets executed, resulting in much faster performance.
Rest of the code is still interpreted by the interpreter, so the frequently executed code that is the
hot spots is not interpreted every single time.
Its corresponding cash machine code is what gets executed directly, and this compilation is referred
to as dynamic compilation as the compilation into machine code is done dynamically at runtime.
Now let's just try to understand this genetic compilation process through a simple example.
Let's consider that we have these two methods called Foo and Bar and some programming languages.
Methods are just referred to as functions.
So in Java we call them as methods and we will discuss methods in the next chapter.
Essentially, they are blocks of code that represent certain logic, certain logic to be executed here.
FU represents some logic and bar would represent something else.
Now let's consider that this method bar here has 50 lines of code.
Now at runtime, the bytecode corresponding to each of these 50 lines of code is interpreted and the
corresponding machine code is executed.
Now this happens the first time the method is executed, and it also happens the second time and so
on until say, 1000 times.
And every single time the byte code corresponding to every line of code here is interpreted and corresponding
machine code is executed.
Now that it ran for 1000 times, this code in bar method could be considered as frequently executed
code.
So GM were designated as hotspot and with that git compiler would then kick in and it would generate
its own machine code version of this entire method.
On JD compiler like a regular compiler could have done some optimizations to when it is generating this
machine code.
And this jihadi generated machine code is then cached.
And when Barr is executed for 1,001st time, the cash machine code will be executed directly.
So there is no more interpretation of the byte code corresponding to the 50 lines of code that the bar
method has.
Since machine code is being executed directly, it would run very fast, just like code written in C
or C++ where CPU executes compiled machine code directly.
So you can see that there is no difference here.
So that's why Java is considered as almost as fast as the languages like C or C++.
Now here, if Barr is executed for, say, 2000 times, then it might trigger another round of optimisation
by the JIT compiler for further speed of execution.
Not that method.
Food may not be that frequently executed and hence might be interpreted every single time.
So this is how conceptually a compiler would work.
The actual way in which it works could differ slightly, but conceptually this is how it would work.
So that's about it.
And that's a high level overview of JVM.
And you can see that it's a very highly sophisticated piece of software that makes Java programs run
very fast and securely and also an platform independently.
Thank you.